Add elasticsearch-node tool docs (#37812)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/commands/node-tool.asciidoc

reports `(4, 10)` then it has the same term as the first node, but has a
smaller version, so the first node is preferred.

[WARNING]
Running this command can lead to arbitrary data loss. Only run this tool if you
understand and accept the possible consequences and have exhausted all other
possibilities for recovery of your cluster.

The sequence of operations for using this tool are as follows:

1. Make sure you have really lost access to at least half of the
master-eligible nodes in the cluster, and they cannot be repaired or recovered
by moving their data paths to healthy hardware.
2. Stop **all** remaining nodes.
3. Choose one of the remaining master-eligible nodes to become the new elected
master as described above.
4. On this node, run the `elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstrap` command as shown
below. Verify that the tool reported `Master node was successfully
bootstrapped`.
5. Start this node and verify that it is elected as the master node.
6. Run the `elasticsearch-node detach-cluster` tool, described below, on every other
node in the cluster.
7. Start all other nodes and verify that each one joins the cluster.

> 8. Investigate the data in the cluster to discover if any was lost during this

Author: @DaveCTurner, do you think it makes sense to add an explicit step "Restore the desired level of fault-tolerance by starting new master-eligible nodes"?

process.

[WARNING]
When you run the tool it will make sure that the node that is being used to
bootstrap the cluster is not running. It is important that all other
master-eligible nodes are also stopped while this tool is running, but the tool
does not check this.

[NOTE]
The message `Master node was successfully bootstrapped` does not mean that
there has been no data loss, it just means that tool was able to complete its
job.

[float]
==== Detaching nodes from their cluster

It is unsafe for nodes to move between clusters, because different clusters
have completely different cluster metadata. There is no way to safely merge the
metadata from two clusters together.

To protect against inadvertently joining the wrong cluster, each cluster
creates a unique identifier, known as the _cluster UUID_, when it first starts
up. Every node records the UUID of its cluster and will refuse to join a

> cluster with a different UUID in future.

Author: Actually, `unsafe-bootstrap` also generates new clusterUUID. However, we only talk about clusterUUID and in `unsafe-bootstrap` section we talk only about resetting voting configuration. I don't hold the opinion strong, but probably we can mention clusterUUID in `unsafe-bootstrap` section.

Reviewer: I pushed 8e46c7dcf9416154c3110d56e56dfbe91aaaefd2 to emphasise it's a new cluster formed by `unsafe-bootstrap`, but without defining what this means in terms of the cluster UUID.

[[node-tool]]
== elasticsearch-node

> The `elasticsearch-node` command allows you to perform unsafe operations that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `elasticsearch-node` command enables you to perform unsafe operations that
```

risk data loss but which may help to recover some data in a disaster.

[float]
=== Synopsis

[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
bin/elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstrap|detach-cluster
  [--ordinal <Integer>] [-E <KeyValuePair>]
  [-h, --help] ([-s, --silent] | [-v, --verbose])
--------------------------------------------------

[float]
=== Description

Sometimes {es} nodes are temporarily stopped, perhaps because of the need to
perform some maintenance activity or perhaps because of a hardware failure.

> Once the temporary condition has been resolved you should restart the node and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you resolve the temporary condition and restart the node,
```

while one or more of its nodes are stopped.

Sometimes it might not be possible to restart a node after it has stopped. For
example, the node's host may suffer from a hardware problem that cannot be
repaired. If the cluster is still available then you can start up a fresh node
on another host and {es} will bring this node into the cluster in place of the
failed node.

Each node stores its data in the data directories defined by the
<<path-settings,`path.data` setting>>. This means that in a disaster you can
also restart a node by moving its data directories to another host, presuming
that those data directories can be recovered from the faulty host.

{es} <<modules-discovery-quorums,requires a response from a majority of the
master-eligible nodes>> in order to elect a master and to update the cluster
state. This means that if you have three master-eligible nodes then the cluster
will remain available even if one of them has failed. However if two of the
three master-eligible nodes fail then the cluster will be unavailable until at
least one of them is restarted.

In very rare circumstances it may not be possible to restart enough nodes to

> restore the cluster's availability. If such a disaster occurs then you should

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
restore the cluster's availability. If such a disaster occurs, you should
```

> build a new cluster from a recent snapshot, and re-import any data that was

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
build a new cluster from a recent snapshot and re-import any data that was
```

ingested since that snapshot was taken.

However, if the disaster is serious enough then it may not be possible to
recover from a recent snapshot either. Unfortunately in this case there is no
way forward that does not risk data loss, but it may be possible to use the
`elasticsearch-node` tool to construct a new cluster that contains some of the
data from the failed cluster.

This tool has two modes:

* `elastisearch-node unsafe-bootstap` can be used if there is at least one
  remaining master-eligible node. It forces one of the remaining nodes to form
  a brand-new cluster on its own, using its local copy of the cluster metadata.
  This is known as _unsafe cluster bootstrapping_.

> * `elastisearch-node detach-cluster` allows you to move nodes from one cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `elastisearch-node detach-cluster` enables you to move nodes from one cluster
```

  to another. This can be used to move nodes into the new cluster created with

>   the `elastisearch-node unsafe-bootstap` command above. It also allows you to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the `elastisearch-node unsafe-bootstap` command. It also enables you to
```

>   move nodes into a brand-new cluster if unsafe cluster bootstrapping was not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  move nodes into a brand-new cluster.
```

>   possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

[[node-tool-unsafe-bootstrap]]
[float]
==== Unsafe cluster bootstrapping

If there is at least one remaining master-eligible node, but it is not possible
to restart a majority of them, then the `elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstrap`
command will unsafely override the cluster's <<modules-discovery-voting,voting
configuration>> as if performing another

> <<modules-discovery-bootstrap-cluster,cluster bootstrapping process>>, allowing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<<modules-discovery-bootstrap-cluster,cluster bootstrapping process>>. 
```

> the target node to form a new cluster on its own. This new cluster forms using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The target node can then form a new cluster on its own by using
```

> the cluster metadata held locally on the target node. This can lead to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the cluster metadata held locally on the target node. 

```

> arbitrary data loss since the target node may not hold the latest cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WARNING: These steps can lead to arbitrary data loss since the target node may not hold the latest cluster
```

metadata, and this out-of-date metadata may make it impossible to use some or
all of the indices in the cluster.

Since unsafe bootstrapping forms a new cluster containing a single node, once
you have run it you must use the <<node-tool-detach-cluster,`elasticsearch-node
detach-cluster` tool>> to migrate any other surviving nodes from the failed
cluster into this new cluster.

When you run the `elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstrap` tool it will analyse the
state of the node and ask for confirmation before taking any action. Before
asking for confirmation it reports the term and version of the cluster state on
the node on which it runs as follows:

[source,txt]
----
Current node cluster state (term, version) pair is (4, 12)
----

If you have a choice of nodes on which to run this tool then you should choose

> one with a term that is as large as possible, and if there is more than one

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
one with a term that is as large as possible. If there is more than one
```

> node with the same term then you should pick the one with the largest version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
node with the same term, pick the one with the largest version.
```

> This identifies the node with the freshest cluster state, minimising the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This information identifies the node with the freshest cluster state, which minimizes the
```

quantity of data that might be lost. For example, if the first node reports
`(4, 12)` and a second node reports `(5, 3)`, then the second node is preferred
since its term is larger.  However if the second node reports `(3, 17)` then
the first node is preferred since its term is larger. If the second node
reports `(4, 10)` then it has the same term as the first node, but has a
smaller version, so the first node is preferred.

> [WARNING]

Reviewer 2: I suggested turning an earlier mention of data loss into a warning, so you can either leave both or combine this with the earlier one.

The sequence of operations for using this tool are as follows:

1. Make sure you have really lost access to at least half of the
master-eligible nodes in the cluster, and they cannot be repaired or recovered
by moving their data paths to healthy hardware.
2. Stop **all** remaining nodes.
3. Choose one of the remaining master-eligible nodes to become the new elected
master as described above.
4. On this node, run the `elasticsearch-node unsafe-bootstrap` command as shown
below. Verify that the tool reported `Master node was successfully
bootstrapped`.
5. Start this node and verify that it is elected as the master node.
6. Run the <<node-tool-detach-cluster,`elasticsearch-node detach-cluster`
tool>>, described below, on every other node in the cluster.
7. Start all other nodes and verify that each one joins the cluster.
8. Investigate the data in the cluster to discover if any was lost during this
process.

[WARNING]
When you run the tool it will make sure that the node that is being used to
bootstrap the cluster is not running. It is important that all other
master-eligible nodes are also stopped while this tool is running, but the tool
does not check this.

> [NOTE]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

The message `Master node was successfully bootstrapped` does not mean that
there has been no data loss, it just means that tool was able to complete its
job.

[[node-tool-detach-cluster]]
[float]
==== Detaching nodes from their cluster

It is unsafe for nodes to move between clusters, because different clusters
have completely different cluster metadata. There is no way to safely merge the
metadata from two clusters together.

To protect against inadvertently joining the wrong cluster, each cluster
creates a unique identifier, known as the _cluster UUID_, when it first starts

> up. Every node records the UUID of its cluster and will refuse to join a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
up. Every node records the UUID of its cluster and refuses to join a
```

> cluster with a different UUID in future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cluster with a different UUID.
```

However, if a node's cluster has permanently failed then it may be desirable to
try and move it into a new cluster. The `elasticsearch-node detach-cluster`

> command lets you detach a node from its cluster by resetting its cluster UUID,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
command lets you detach a node from its cluster by resetting its cluster UUID.
```

> so that it can join another cluster with a different UUID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It can then join another cluster with a different UUID.
```

[float]
=== Background

Sometimes {es} nodes are temporarily stopped, perhaps because of the need to
perform some maintenance activity or perhaps because of a hardware failure.
Once the temporary condition has been resolved you should restart the node and
it will rejoin the cluster and continue normally. Depending on your
configuration, your cluster may be able to remain completely available even
while one or more of its nodes are stopped.

Sometimes it might not be possible to restart a node after it has stopped. For
example, the node's host may suffer from a hardware problem that cannot be
repaired. If the cluster is still available then you can start up
a fresh node on another host and {es} will bring this node into the cluster in place
of the failed node.

Each node stores its data in the data directories defined by the
<<path-settings,`path.data` setting>>. This means that in a disaster you can
also restart a node by moving its data directories to another host, presuming
that those data directories can be recovered from the faulty host. Note that it

> is not possible to restore the data directory from a backup because this will

Author: @DaveCTurner Not sure what you mean by "is not possible to restore the data directory from a backup". 
If you copy full data folder to another node, this node will be indistinguishable from the previous node.

Reviewer: Copying the literal data directory of the dead node somewhere else, post-mortem, is ok, but restoring from a backup (which could be who-knows-how stale) is decidedly not. We occasionally see people taking backups of their data directories and causing hassle when they discover that they can't restore from such things, and I saw a risk that this paragraph might be interpreted wrongly by those kinds of people.

Author: @DaveCTurner Now I see what you mean, can we re-phrase it like "Note that if you have previously taken a backup of the data folder of the stopped node, you can not restore from it, you need a data folder state at the moment this node was stopped"

Reviewer: The trouble with the phrase "if you have previously taken a backup of the data folder" is that it suggests this is a thing you might try and do, and I think we should avoid making that suggestion. Technically you _can't_ take a backup of the data folder: a backup from which you cannot ever safely restore isn't really a backup at all 🤔.

Author: @DaveCTurner I agree. In this case, probably it makes sense to remove this sentence at all because it's confusing?
Also, the better place for explaining that there is no reason to copy data folders because it's not possible to restore from them is on the snapshot page.
